[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today, we're going to
examine the nature of time
and the relationship between
time and the human mind.
With me in the studio
is Terence McKenna,
a specialist in shamanistic
traditions and also
hallucinogens.
Terence is the co-author
with his brother Dennis
of "Psilocybin, The Magic
Mushroom Growers Guide,"
and also "The Invisible
Landscape, Time, Hallucinogens,
and the I Ching."
In addition, he is the developer
of a computer software program
called Timewave Zero
and is the founder
of Botanical Dimensions, a
non-profit organization devoted
to preserving hallucinogenic
plants as used
by native peoples
throughout the world.
Welcome, Terence.
>> It's a pleasure to be here.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you again.
You know, shamanistic
peoples and early peoples
throughout the
entire world have all
been involved in systems
of what we call divination.
It could be throwing
bones or using the I Ching
or looking at the entrails of
animals or clouds of smoke.
But each system
seemed to involve
some sort of a
unique way of linking
the human mind with
the very nature of time
itself in order to
understand cycles of time
and understand, perhaps
even to predict, the future.
>> Yes, well, it's certainly
true that pre-literate
and Aboriginal peoples have
had an obsession with time.
However, it's an
obsession shared
by the historical
societies as well.
Time seems to be the
dimension about which we
have the greatest anxiety,
perhaps because it's
the dimension into which we
see with the least clarity.
Numerous peoples
throughout the world
have dealt with
this lack of clarity
as far as time is
concerned by developing
various methods of divination
or sortilege, as it's called.
The Maya, to this day,
practice sortilege
of a very complicated sort in
the highlands of Guatemala.
African peoples have
complex divinatory systems.
>> And we don't have to even
mention the enormous sales
of the I Ching and Tarot decks
and astrology products here
in the United States.
>> Yes, the I Ching is the
divinatory system ne plus
ultra.
It seems to very
early have captured
the imagination of Western
orientalist James Legge
and Richard Wilhelm.
Their translations made it
available to the Western world.
And the psychologist Carl Jung
in inventing and discussing
the phenomenon that he
called synchronicity
popularized the I
Ching by using it
as an example of this
particular phenomenon.
>> And I know in the
literature today,
especially in
transpersonal psychology,
there are many psychotherapists
who use the I Ching
as a regular part
of their practice.
And parapsychologists have
found striking evidence
that the coincidences of
tossing the coins in the I Ching
do have psychological validity.
>> Yes, well, the thing which
amazed me about the I Ching
and caused me to become so
deeply involved with it is this
fact that it seems to work.
Against all rational
expectation,
the carrying out of this
random, ritualistic activity
seems then to give a reading,
which is, in fact, applicable
to the unique situation.
Now, Jung's
explanation of this was
what he called
acausal connectedness,
or synchronicity.
This was simply the idea
that it was possible
for there to be a
coincidence of congruence
between an internal state,
a psychological state,
and an exterior event.
An obvious example
of this would be
you think of someone you
haven't thought of for years
and an hour later in the mail
a letter arrives from them.
And Jung was fascinated by these
kinds of apparent coordinations
of the interiorized
psychic sphere
and the exterior
three-dimensional objective
world.
My approach went somewhat
deeper than Jung's in that
I felt that I had looked
at many divinatory systems
with the notion
that I was looking
at artifacts of culture,
productions of the human mind
that were, to a large
degree, arbitrary.
My involvement with
the I Ching led me
very slowly and reluctantly
to the conclusion
that this was not simply a
product of a cultural mentality
or the stance of a particular
people in a time and a place,
but rather that the ancient
Chinese had somehow gotten
a leg up, even on
modern physics,
and had produced a
theory about time that
was, in fact, objectively
possible to correlate
with our own experience, in
other words, a theory of time
much more akin to a
physicist's description of it
than a shaman's
description of it.
And you mentioned
in your introduction
this Timewave Zero software
that we've developed.
What we've done is simply to
formalize the notion of the Tao
to make a deep study
of the mathematics
inherent in the structure of
the sequence of the I Ching.
See, most people are quite
familiar with the fact
that the I Ching is
composed of hexagrams.
Hexagrams have six lines.
They may be broken.
They may be unbroken.
Less well known is
the fact that there
is a very ancient tradition,
even before the Han Dynasty,
of a particular sequence
being the correct sequence.
It's called the
King Wen sequence.
And while it has been agreed
upon by all scholars commenting
on the matter that the King Wen
sequence is somehow primary,
no one had ever explained
how it was ordered.
>> You mean the order of
hexagrams from 1 to 64?
>> That's correct.
Why is the first one the
hexagram with all solid lines.
Why is the second one the
hexagram with all broken lines,
and so forth and so on?
I carried out exhaustive
mathematical analysis
of the properties of
the King Wen sequence
and reached a number
of conclusions, such
as it is not a random sequence.
It was very, very
carefully constructed
to conserve certain
mathematical goals.
For instance, the
number of lines
that break as you transit
from one hexagram to another
is arranged and
controlled in such a way
that when you're all done,
you have a ratio of even
to odd of 3 to 4.
Yet, this is achieved without
any breakages, first order
of different breakages
of magnitude 5.
>> Now, you're beginning
to lose me a little bit.
>> Yes, well, what this all
means very simply is that
the King Wen sequence
was constructed by minds,
the equal of research
mathematicians working
in the world today.
>> It sort of reminds me of
the builders of the great Greek
temples who used the
mystical rectangle.
>> Proportion and symmetry seems
to be the central concern here.
You see, we have inherited from
our fascination with Eastern
philosophy the idea of Tao.
And Tao in the East
is a concept which
antedates the
introduction of Buddhism
into China by many,
many centuries.
Tao is the notion of a
flux, which comes and goes,
a transient medium,
which builds structures
up and pulls them
apart according
to its internal dynamic.
Now, because these notions
were introduced to the West
by mystics and
philosophers and people
with an interest
in metaphysics, it
wasn't immediately grasped
that a philosophy of this sort
could be a
mathematical formalism,
that if we're talking about a
medium, which comes and goes,
we're talking about a wave
mechanical phenomenon.
Well, science in the West
for the past 150 years
has developed a powerful
set of techniques
for dealing with
wave phenomenon.
>> And you seem to be suggesting
then that the 64 hexagrams
of the I Ching in their
mathematical relationship,
one to the other as you
go through the sequence,
describes a waveform.
>> A waveform which is
experienced in the world
by human beings as
time and history.
You see, it's almost as though--
in Western science, we we're
pretty confident that there
are approximately 100 elements,
physical elements to matter--
>> That's right,
different atoms.
>> That's right, that
are incommensurable.
They are somehow primary.
The Chinese looked not at
the world of matter, energy,
and space, but
the world of time,
and carried out a
very rigorous analysis
of their own perception and
discovered to their amazement
that time is actually
composed of elements.
>> And as we have then, if
I can extrapolate from what
you're saying, the periodic
table of elements in Western
chemistry, which defines
not just 100 elements,
but a relationship between
them, cycles and patterns.
>> Bonding relationships,
that's right.
>> Families of chemicals--
>> That's right.
>> So we have, in other words,
families of ways of looking
at time.
>> Well, the hexagrams are the
elements in the Chinese physics
of time.
They created a science that
reinforces primary perceptions
that we all have, but for
which we have no science.
For instance, I'm sure you've
noticed that every day is
rather like every other day.
Nevertheless, I'm
sure you've also
noticed that some
days are radically
different than others.
Well, this sameness
but different rule
applies on all levels
in a temporal hierarchy.
Centuries are rather
like each other,
and yet occasionally a
century will come along
that is quite anomalous.
We call this sameness and
difference nesting fractal.
This is a new branch
of mathematics.
And quite simply what
the Chinese discovered,
circa 3,000 BC, was the
fractal nature of time,
that the rules of expression
of temporal elements
which govern the rise
and fall of dynasties
also govern the rise and fall
of love affairs and moods.
>> Now, you're describing
this in mathematical terms.
And I'd like to come back and
ask you to define the term
fractal in a moment.
But I'm also curious
about how you
seem to be going back and
forth between something
purely quantitative and
something qualitative.
>> Well that's the
interesting thing, you see.
The Chinese understood that
these temporal elements
were in a sense creating
interference patterns
with each other, much in the
way that pure tones struck out
on a keyboard will,
through their interference
with each other,
create a melody.
So that, for instance,
if I find myself
sitting in Hadrian's hamburger
joint enjoying a burger,
by this theory,
there would actually
be a relationship
between that act
and the Emperor Hadrian's
campaigns in Britain
before the fall of
the Roman Empire.
This is the amazing thing which
James Joyce used and understood
in the construction
of his literary works,
that a man leaving his home
in Dublin on a day in 1905
to buy kidneys to
fry for breakfast
is in some mysterious
way actually repeating
the peregrinations
of the hero Odysseus
around the Mediterranean in
his campaign to destroy Troy
and return to his faithful wife.
Allegory is what
we're talking about.
But allegory has never been
taken seriously by science.
Analogical reasoning
is definitely
declasse in the
better laboratories.
But in this ancient Chinese
way of looking at things,
everything was caused by
its analogical resonances
with past and
future events which
had the same temporal
elements embedded in them.
Now, it's difficult to go
into this without resorting
to at least charts and diagrams,
if not puzzling equations
with sigmas embedded in them.
>> But let me step
back for a moment,
because we've been talking very
intensively about the I Ching,
which is one system, a very
popular and profound and highly
respected system, of this type.
But there are other
comparable systems.
For example, there is astrology.
>> That's right.
Astrology is another one
of these systems that
seeks to define pre-potent
relationships in nature that
can be known by man in order to
ease movement into the future.
The success of astrology
I think is borne out
by its persistence.
It is after all one
of the most persistent
of human intellectual tools.
It was developed 4,000
or 5,000 years ago.
I think what troubles modern
human beings about astrology
is that it is a
mechanistic system.
It's like a group
of cogs and wheels,
which all can turn
at given rates.
And therefore, their end
states can be predicted.
>> But then we're dealing
again with the nature of nested
cycles.
>> Well, we have a strong
intuition of free will.
And this is why I
think quantum physics
with its probabilistic
notion of determinicy
has been so attractive
to the modern mind.
My conclusions
looking at I Ching
have been that it is not
possible to know the future,
for if it were possible to know
it, life would be a determinism
and thinking would be
divorced from meaning.
And we would be out of business.
But what is possible to
know about the future
is levels of novelty
which future states
will fulfill by the happenstance
of unpredictable events.
Now, this is a
formal way of saying,
we know where the road
goes, but we don't know
what the scenery looks like.
I think where the
future is concerned,
we can know where the road
goes, but we cannot know what
the scenery will look like.
People who have
looked at my theory
have said, well, these time
maps that your computer draws,
you're trying to get
rid of the future.
And as a matter of
fact, a map of time
no more eliminates the future
than a map of South America
eliminates the need to go there.
It simply gives one a better
handle on one's destination.
>> Now, you mentioned
quantum physics a moment ago.
In quantum physics, there are
a number of different notions
related to the future.
One is a notion of
multiple universes.
Another that--
>> The Wheeler notions.
>> Yes.
And another is a notion of
everything is probabilistic,
and while we can't with any
certainty what will happen,
we can state with various
probabilities what
the possibilities are.
How does this relate to your
view of time in the future?
>> Well, I think that at
the macrophysical level,
things are rather rigidly
determined with the exception
of living organisms.
So my interpretation
of what biology is
and how it relates to
quantum physics and time
is really biological
systems are amplifiers
of quantum mechanical
indeterminacies.
They are a way of taking the
smidgen of indeterminacy that
exists at the
microphysical level
and coaxing it into a kind of
macrophysical cascade, which
is life consciousness
and self-reflection.
>> And you see this
described in the I Ching.
>> Yes, I think the I Ching
is an abstract modeling system
for breaking this down to its
simplest elements and then
seeing how it works.
Now, we're accustomed
to thinking
of science as linear progress
from the distant past
due to the present.
What I'm suggesting is that at
least in the matter of time,
the Chinese of
the pre-Han period
had a much more true
and formally applicable
notion of time than
we ourselves do.
We have failed in our
effort to assimilate time
into our physics, because
of our obsession with matter
and the release of energy.
>> Now, there's some scholars
who suggest that the African
Yoruba people with their system
of divination called Ifa,
which has a cycle I think
of 244 or 264 various myths
and stories, is even more
sophisticated than the I Ching,
which has only 64.
Have you looked into that?
>> I have looked into it.
What makes the I Ching
so powerful in my mind
is that it appears to
be an exact analogy
to the mechanism of DNA.
There are 64 codons, which
code for amino acids in DNA.
There are 64 hexagrams.
There are 8 primary hexagram.
There are 8 indispensable
amino acids.
I felt that really the I
Ching is like mankind's best
shot at this because
it has this reflection
in the biological matrix, out
of which consciousness emerged.
>> In other words, the various
ancient divination systems may
all reflect a striving of human
beings towards this intuitive
understanding of the
cyclical nature of time
and the relationship between
mind and the flow of time.
And yet, the I Ching
may observe sort
of hit the nail on the head
better than the others.
>> Well, it's like looking
at a 17th century description
of the motion of the planets
or a 20th century description.
These are basically refinements.
But, yes, I think that
the I Ching represents
a primary perception of the
organization of mind, time,
and matter.
And I'll even tell you how
I think they got a leg up.
I think basically
there is a tradition
in Central Asia of
the so-called stilling
the heart techniques,
vis-a-vis yoga.
These are techniques where
vital functions are suppressed.
Breathing becomes very minimal.
All exterior inputs
are suspended.
And eventually, I
think the Chinese sages
who practiced this
form of meditation
noticed a flux at the
center of the stillness,
which they called Tao,
and which they set out
to phenomenalogically describe,
not knowing whether it was
physics, organism, or deity.
And they did not
prejudge this question.
They simply gave a
phenomenological description
of the transcendental flux
that they encountered in states
of deep yogic ecstasy.
And lo and behold, it
turns out that this
is the perfect technique
for studying time.
Time is not a
phenomenon where you
build machines with
8 kilometer diameters
that cost trillions of dollars.
Time is a phenomenon
to be studied
by attending dinner parties
perhaps or pursuing love
affairs or watching the passing
of the seasons, activities much
more commiserate with our
vision of the Tao sage
than the white coated
scientist of the present world
religion of science.
So really, I think it was
an involvement in organism
and in the human experience.
>> In other words, the
laboratory for studying time
would not so much be our
observatories or our systems
of quartz clocks, but rather
looking inside of ourselves,
observing our own organism.
>> That's exactly precise,
and the workings of our own
psychology.
To my mind, the
greatest commentator
on time in the 20th century
after Albert Einstein
would certainly have
to be Marcel Proust.
Proust understood
more about the time
we experience, and was
able to communicate it,
than any person
who has ever lived.
And that's within
the confines of what
most people consider a
fairly, effete, high brow
literary project.
>> "Swann's Way."
>> Well, the entirety of
"Remembrance of Things Past."
>> Yes.
I haven't read that.
So you've got me a
bit in the dark here.
We have about five minutes left.
So could you summarize that
point or amplify it a bit?
>> Well, I think the point
we're trying to make here,
that I have been involved
with over the past few years,
is that a revisioning of time
would assuage much of what is
called modern anxiety, and that
we have limited the categories
we were willing to entertain
in dealing with this problem,
and that we must genuflect to
the ancient Chinese and take
a page from their
notebook in this matter.
The I Ching as a divinatory
system of great age reflecting
the dynamics of our own
genetic material and also,
though I didn't mention
this this evening,
it also has deep
calendrical properties--
it can be used to
keep track of time--
lay as a basis for
an understanding
of this curious phenomenon
called synchronicity,
the coincidental meshing
of interior psychic events
and exterior events
in the real world.
It lays the basis
for us to understand
the unity of ourselves
with the real world
that our present approach
makes it difficult to discern.
>> So whereas Carl Jung the
great Swiss psychiatrist,
who wrote incidentally
the preface to Richard
Wilhelm's book of the I Ching,
and postulated this theory
of synchronicity, well, Jung
didn't really provide any
mechanism for synchronicity.
He simply said it works this
way, that the mind seems
to be related to these events.
And he found an enormous
therapeutic benefit
from that understanding.
What you're suggesting is
that the potential mechanism
behind the Jungian
notion of synchronicity
has to do with the
structure of time itself.
>> That's right.
>> And you must be
suggesting, therefore,
that the human mind at this
very deep level that the sages
discovered from
stilling their organism,
that the mind has a
parallel structure,
an isomorphic structure.
>> That's exactly
the central point.
The mind arises out of matter.
This is why the I Ching
works in both worlds.
One is the reflection
of the other.
The key to healing
the apparent dualism
lies in studying the
temporal mechanics indicated
by the I Ching.
And I believe we've done this
formally, mathematically.
>> Terence McKenna, you're
taking the provocative position
that the I Ching, which some
people view as religion,
and other people
dismisses superstition,
is actually a science.
And I gather that your computer
software package Timewave Zero
proposes to be the
demonstration of that?
>> We believe it
does demonstrate it.
Of course, ultimately, it
will be up to our colleagues
to judge the worth of our case.
>> Terence, it's
been a pleasure.
Thank you very much
for being with me.
>> Well it's been a pleasure
to be here, Jeffrey,
and discuss this with you.
It's not an easy
subject, believe me.
>> And thank you very
much for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]